Five Big Ideas in
Artificial Intelligence v.2
5. Societal Impact

AI can impact society in both positive and

negative ways. AI technologies are
changing the ways we work, travel,
communicate, and care for each
other. But we must be mindful of the
harms that can potentially occur.
For example, biases in the data
used to train an AI system could
lead to some people being less well
served than others. Thus, it is
important to discuss the impacts
that AI is having on our society and
develop criteria for the ethical design
and deployment of AI-based
systems.

4. Natural Interaction

Intelligent agents require many kinds
of knowledge to collaborate and
interact naturally with humans. Ideally,
agents will converse with us using natural
language, draw upon cultural knowledge to
infer intentions from observed behavior, and
respond appropriately to body language, facial
expressions, and emotions. Advances in deep neural
networks such as large language models and convolutional
neural networks are making this possible.
The AI for K-12 Initiative is a joint project of the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI)
and the Computer Science Teachers Association (CSTA), funded by National Science Foundation award DRL-1846073

1. Perception

Computers perceive the world using sensors. Perception is the
process of extracting meaning from sensory signals. Making
computers “see” and “hear” well enough for practical use is
one of the most significant achievements of AI to
date.

2. Representation & Reasoning

Agents maintain representations of the world
and use them for reasoning. Representation
is one of the fundamental problems of
intelligence, both natural and artificial.
Computers construct representations
using data structures,
and these
representations support reasoning
algorithms that derive new information
from what is already known. While AI
agents can reason about very complex
problems, they do not think the way a
human does.

3. Learning

Computers can learn from data. Machine
learning is a kind of statistical inference that
finds patterns in data. Many areas of AI
have progressed significantly in recent years
thanks to learning algorithms that create new
representations. For the approach to succeed,
tremendous amounts of data are required. This “training
data” must usually be supplied by people, but is sometimes
acquired by the machine itself.
This work is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.
To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/.

