GRADE

TIME

6–12

15 MINS.

What Is AI?
What is artificial intelligence and what are its
potential benefits and drawbacks?

TOPICS

Information &
Media Literacy
Digital
Citizenship &
Literacy
Artificial
Intelligence

Artificial intelligence technology is evolving quickly. Use this short lesson to help
students get acquainted with how AI works and consider some of its potential
benefits and drawbacks.
For more AI-related lessons, check out the AI Literacy lesson collection.
Students will be able to:
OBJECTIVES
Define what artificial intelligence is.
Understand what makes generative AI unique.
Reflect on the benefits and drawbacks of generative AI.
Vocabulary:
artificial intelligence (AI)
a computer program or app that can perform tasks that typically require human
intelligence
generative AI
a type of AI that can create content, including text, images, and audio
What You’ll Need
Some resources below are available in Spanish

IN CLASS
- Lesson Slides
- Video: What Is AI?
- AI Explained
Handout
Teacher Version

Lesson Plan
Watch: What Is AI?

15 mins.

1. Ask: Have you ever heard about artificial intelligence, or AI? (Slide 4)
Invite students to share their prior knowledge. If your students are already
familiar with artificial intelligence, you can ask the follow-up questions on Slide
5.
2. Say: We're going to watch a video that explains what AI is. And we'll talk about a
specific kind of AI that is quite popular right now, called generative AI (Slide 6).
3. Show the What Is AI? video (Slide 7) and have students complete the active
viewing guide on the AI Explained handout.
Refer to the Teacher Version of the handout to guide the discussion. You can
also refer to slides 8–10 and define generative AI as a type of AI that can create
content, including text, images, and audio (Slide 10).
4. Say: In the video, they mentioned some of the cool things generative AI can do, as
well as some of the potential concerns, or things we should look out for when using it.
Given what you know, do you think generative AI will be mostly helpful or harmful to
society? Pick the side that you agree with the most. Be sure to have at least one
reason to support your opinion (Slide 11).
Note: This article provides additional context on the benefits and risks of
generative AI.

5. Have students position themselves physically to show where they stand,
forming a line along one wall. You can also have students share with a thumbsup/down.
Then review slides 12–15, inviting students to share their perspectives and add
to the reasons that are listed. As students listen to their classmates'
perspectives, their own stance may shift. If students have physically located
themselves on a line or in different corners of the room, invite them to shift
their location to represent any changes in their thinking.
6. Say: Balancing the potential benefits and drawbacks of a new technology can be
tricky. When it comes to AI and generative AI, we must think critically about its
impacts and remember that we're each in control of how we use it (Slide 16).

© Common Sense Media. Lessons are shareable with attribution for noncommercial use only. No
remixing permitted. View detailed license information at creativecommons.org. Lesson last
updated:

