WHAT WE DO ▽

Home

AI Ethics Learning Toolkit

BLOG

SEARCH

CONTACT US

EVENTS

RESOURCES

SUBSCRIBE

ABOUT US ▽

Is AI A Spy

AI ETHICS LEARNING TOOLKIT

Is AI A Spy?
Exploring Privacy and Surveillance

“Generative AI completely obliterates the idea of individual responsibility for privacy
because you can’t control these algorithms’ access to your information, or what they
do with it.”
– Dr. Alice Marwick, media scholar

Sam Altman, CEO of OpenAI, recently tweeted that ChatGPT’s improved
memory meant that it can now reference past conversations and “get to
know you over your life.” Is this helpful, or creepy? AI privacy involves
how your personal information is collected, used, and shared by AI
companies. This includes data scraped from the web without your consent
and data you input into AI systems through prompts. A 2023 Pew
Research poll found that 81% of Americans who had heard of AI believe
the information collected by AI companies will be used in ways people are
uncomfortable with or that weren’t originally intended. Pew Research also
found that 6 in 10 Americans frequently skip reading privacy policies. This

highlights the “privacy paradox,” the gulf between people’s attitudes
towards protecting their privacy and their actual online behavior. Despite
privacy concerns, many people freely give away their personal data for the
convenience of using apps, websites, and now AI tools. For students, AI
privacy is particularly significant. As students rely on AI tools for learning,
research, writing, and even personal advice, they should be mindful of the
sensitive data they share and consider when it’s appropriate to disclose
information.

Learning Activities

Conversation Starters A Few Questions to Get the
Discussion Going

What privacy protections do you use to safeguard your identity
online? Do you use caution with the information you enter into AI
tools? Do you read privacy policies?
Would you ever talk to an AI chatbot as a friend or confidant? How
do the responses make you feel? If you use AI in this way, how is
what you share di!erent (or the same) to what you’d share with a
friend?
Can you think of situations where it might be harmful for AI
companies to collect, train on, or share someone’s private
information? Are there times where AI personalization features are
actually helpful?
Who should be responsible for protecting a user’s privacy in an AI
system? Should it be the individual, the AI company, or the
government?
What ethical considerations should guide the use of generative AI
in collecting or analyzing sensitive data, such as private

conversations or biometric information?

Active Learning with AI Fun Ways to Explore AI’s
Strengths and Limitations

What does AI know about you? Have students prompt AI to see if it
“knows” anything about them. If nothing turns up/or your name is
too common, what does it have to say about your professor? Did it
make anything up? Is it creepy? Where is it sourcing the
information?
AI privacy policy review. Have students work in teams to review the
privacy policy for major AI companies (OpenAI, Google’s Gemini,
Meta). Ask questions like, what surprised you? What do you find
confusing?
No AI Alternative: Data, Privacy, and Identity card game. Try this
activity that aims to teach students about the intersections of data,
privacy, and identity. A simpler, online version of this activity can
be found here.

Disciplinary Extensions Ideas for Exploring AI’s Impact in
Specific Fields

Biology/Ethics: Students could explore common biometric data
collection methods (e.g. fingerprint, facial recognition, DNA
sequencing) used in biology and medicine. Ask students to reflect
on the ethical implications of di!erent forms of biometric data
collection.
Social Sciences: Students could explore how privacy breaches

harm marginalized populations disproportionately. Assign teams
di!erent groups of people and have them consider a case study
(ex. AI in policing, AI in healthcare, AI in immigration).
Philosophy: Where is the line between a right to privacy and
surveillance for security’s sake?
Computer Science/Engineering: What are some
techniques/mechanisms that can be incorporated into AI tools to
provide more privacy for the end user?

Resources
Bogost, I., & Warzel, C. (2025, April 27). American panopticon. The Atlantic. [Magazine article]
Burgess, M. (2024, October 12). How to stop your data from being used to train AI. Wired. [Magazine
article]
Joseph, J. (2025, April 11). ChatGPT has receipts, will now remember everything you’ve ever told it.
PCMAG. [Magazine article]
Marwick, A. (2023). You are not responsible for your own online Privacy. Wired. [Magazine article]
Roose, K., et al. (2021, August 20). Why Apple is about to search your files. The New York Times. [Podcast]
Predates GAI but excellent story on privacy & ethics.

Scholarly
Crowley, J. (2016, November 28). Identity, privacy & privilege: Using data to discuss systemic racism – Ethical
Tech. [Blog post]
Faverio, M. (2023, October 18). Key findings about Americans and data privacy. Pew Research Center.
[Research Report]
Hargittai, E., & Marwick, A. (2016). “What can I really do?” Explaining the privacy paradox with online
apathy. International Journal of Communication, 10. [Journal article]

Recommendations
Related topics → Can we trust AI?

Penn State University, Digital Shred, Privacy Literacy Toolkit. Excellent resources compiled by librarians
at PSU-Berks.
AI Pedagogy Project (Harvard) Assignments → Filter by theme (e.g. privacy) and/or subject (e.g. ethics &
philosophy)
Privacy-related Articles from the AI Ethics & Policy News Aggregator sourced by Casey Fiesler. Note: This
would be an excellent place to identify recent news stories you could share with students, or
incorporate into a case study.

1. Marwick, A. (n.d.). You Are Not Responsible for Your Own Online Privacy. Wired. Retrieved July 18, 2025,
from https://www.wired.com/story/you-are-not-responsible-for-your-own-online-privacy/
2. Sam Altman [@sama]. (2025, April 10). We have greatly improved memory in chatgpt—It can now reference
all your past conversations! This is a surprisingly great feature imo, and it points at something we are excited
about: Ai systems that get to know you over your life, and become extremely useful and personalized.
[Tweet]. Twitter. https://x.com/sama/status/1910380643772665873
3. Faverio, M. (2023, October 18). Key findings about Americans and data privacy. Pew Research Center.
https://www.pewresearch.org/short-reads/2023/10/18/key-findings-about-americans-and-data-privacy/
4. Faverio, M.
5. Hargittai, E., & Marwick, A. (2016). “What Can I Really Do?” Explaining the Privacy Paradox with Online
Apathy. International Journal of Communication, 10.

PHYSICAL LOCATION
The Erwin Square Mill Building
2024 West Main Street

BROWSE
What We Do
About

Durham, NC 27705

MAILING ADDRESS
Box 90700

Blog
Contact Us
Events

Durham, NC 27708

Directions

CONTACT US

Resources

Phone: (919) 660-5806
Email:

Newsletter Signup

learninginnovation@duke.edu

CONNECT
WITH US
SUPPORT OUR
WORK
Donate to Duke
Learning Innovation &
Lifetime Education

Copyright © 2025 Duke Learning Innovation & Lifetime Education

