WHAT WE DO ▽

Home

AI Ethics Learning Toolkit

BLOG

SEARCH

CONTACT US

EVENTS

RESOURCES

SUBSCRIBE

ABOUT US ▽

Is AI biased?

AI ETHICS LEARNING TOOLKIT

Is Ai Biased?
Exploring Bias and Monoculture

“Algorithmic oppression is not just a glitch in the system but, rather, is fundamental
to the operating system of the web.”
– Dr. Safiya Noble, Information Sciences Scholar

The concept of “garbage in, garbage out” illustrates a core aspect of AI’s
limitations: biased training data produces biased outputs. The exact
training datasets used by models like GPT-4 are kept secret, but we know
they rely on massive collections of human-generated text scraped from
the open internet, including sites like Reddit, Wikipedia, and countless
websites and forums. In a famous critique on the ethics of Large Language
Models, researchers note that the internet is overrun with hegemonic or
monocultural viewpoints which leads to an overrepresentation of white
supremacist, misogynistic, and ageist perspectives in the training data. As
AI usage grows, these biased worldviews are encoded in its data and
potentially amplified into the culture. One good example of this bias is

linguistic diversity. There are over 7,100 languages spoken in the world,
yet very few of those languages are documented on the Internet, and even
fewer are supported by Generative AI models. Given the risks of AI bias,
students should reflect on the many points at which bias can enter the AI
pipeline—from what data is included, to how it’s labeled or filtered, to
what questions the users ask. Understanding these potential areas of bias
helps students critically evaluate the information AI provides—and
consider who gets represented, and who gets left out.

Learning Activities

Conversation Starters A Few Questions to Get the
Discussion Going

What types of bias have you noticed on social media, or the
internet more broadly? Did these shape your opinion or behavior?
Have you ever noticed any biases, or inaccuracies, in AI-generated
responses? What made you question it?
What strategies do you use to spot bias in news, social media, or
AI-generated content?
How might generative AI unintentionally reinforce harmful
stereotypes or deepen social inequalities? Can you think of
examples?
Whose perspectives do you think are most represented in online
content and AI outputs? Whose voices are left out – and why might
that be?

Active Learning with AI Fun Ways to Explore AI’s
Strengths and Limitations

Prompt an AI image generator for an image of a lawyer, engineer,
doctor, etc, and compare the gender, ethnicity, age of the person.
Were there stereotypes represented in the outputs?
Prompt AI for a brief history of an historical event or social
phenomenon that the class is studying. Discuss the
perspectives/biases present and absent in the AI’s output. Examine
what sources it used (if available).
No AI Alternative: Don’t use an image AI generator, but check out
this article on AI stereotypes in which authors explored images and
stereotypes with AI. Discuss your reactions in small groups.

Disciplinary Extensions Ideas for Exploring AI’s Impact in
Specific Fields

Linguistics course: Students can explore how AI handles
sociolinguistics and code-switching. For example, students could
prompt AI with di"erent dialects, or registers, and see how it
understands these and responds. Does it try to “correct”/normalize
the prompting language?
Social Science courses (ex. GSF, AMES, AAAS): Students can use
AI to explore how it frames certain topics or identities. Connect this
activity to theories and readings discussed in class about
stereotypes and cultural biases/discrimination.
TRIGGER
WARNING: Instructors should take care to frame an AI activity
thoughtfully, as the AI outputs may be unexpected and/or
triggering.
Foreign Language course: Students could prompt AI for a story
(in foreign language) that includes potential for biased outputs.
Example: Help me write a story about a doctor and a nurse

working in a small, rural village. Does it gender the doctor/nurse?
Does it include rural stereotypes?

Resources
Perrigo, B. (2022, January 18). Why Timnit Gebru Isn’t Waiting for Big Tech to Fix AI’s Problems. TIME.
[Magazine article]
Busiek, J. (2024, March 21). Three fixes for AI’s bias problem. University of California. [Blog post]
Nicoletti, L., & Equality, D. B. T. +. (2025, January 17). Humans are biased. Generative AI is even worse.
Bloomberg. [News article]
Turk, V. (2023, October 10). How AI reduces the world to stereotypes. Rest of World. [Article]
Je"ries, A. (2017, April 27). Machine learning is racist because the internet is racist. The Outline. [Article]

Lizarraga, L. (2023, November 8). How does a computer discriminate? Interview with Safiya Noble. Code
Switch Podcast. NPR. [Podcast]

Scholarly
Bender, E. M., Gebru, T., McMillan-Major, A., & Shmitchell, S. (2021). On the Dangers of Stochastic
Parrots: Can Language Models Be Too Big?

. Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness,

Accountability, and Transparency, 610–623. [Article]
Gebru, T., & Torres, É. P. (2024). The TESCREAL bundle: Eugenics and the promise of utopia through
artificial general intelligence. First Monday. [Journal article]
Noble, S. U. (2018). Algorithms of Oppression: How Search Engines Reinforce Racism. NYU Press. [Book –
available in Duke Libraries]
Sourati, Z., Karimi-Malekabadi, F., Ozcan, M., McDaniel, C., Ziabari, A., Trager, J., Tak, A., Chen, M.,
Morstatter, F., & Dehghani, M. (2025). The Shrinking Landscape of Linguistic Diversity in the Age of
Large Language Models. arXiv. [Preprint]
Hofmann, V., Kalluri, P.R., Jurafsky, D. et al.AI generates covertly racist decisions about people based on
their dialect. Nature 633, 147–154 (2024). [Journal article]

Recommendations

Related topics → Does AI spread mis/disinfo? Does AI harm critical thinking?
AI Pedagogy Project (Harvard) Assignments → Filter by theme (e.g. bias) and/or subject (e.g. ethics &
philosophy)
Bias-related Articles from the AI Ethics & Policy News Aggregator sourced by Casey Fiesler. Note: This
would be an excellent place to identify recent news stories you could share with students, or
incorporate into a case study.

1. Noble, S. U. (2018). Algorithms of Oppression: How Search Engines Reinforce Racism. NYU Press.
2. Bender, E. M., Gebru, T., McMillan-Major, A., & Shmitchell, S. (2021). On the Dangers of Stochastic
Parrots: Can Language Models Be Too Big? Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness,
Accountability, and Transparency, 610–623. https://doi.org/10.1145/3442188.3445922

PHYSICAL LOCATION
The Erwin Square Mill Building
2024 West Main Street

BROWSE
What We Do
About

Durham, NC 27705

MAILING ADDRESS
Box 90700

Blog
Contact Us
Events

Durham, NC 27708

Directions

CONTACT US

Resources

Phone: (919) 660-5806
Email:

Newsletter Signup

learninginnovation@duke.edu

CONNECT
WITH US
SUPPORT OUR
WORK
Donate to Duke
Learning Innovation &
Lifetime Education

Copyright © 2025 Duke Learning Innovation & Lifetime Education

