WHAT WE DO ▽

Home

AI Ethics Learning Toolkit

BLOG

SEARCH

CONTACT US

EVENTS

RESOURCES

SUBSCRIBE

ABOUT US ▽

Is AI Sustainable

AI ETHICS LEARNING TOOLKIT

Is AI Sustainable?
Exploring Environmental Impacts

“Generative AI has a very disproportionate energy and carbon footprint with very little in
terms of positive stu! for the environment.”
– Dr. Sasha Luccioni, Artificial Intelligence Researcher & Climate Lead, Hugging Face

The rapid growth of AI has environmental implications, raising concerns
regarding its sustainability and carbon footprint. AI systems require vast
amounts of computational power, which could lead to high energy
consumption and greenhouse gas emissions. The data centers that
support AI operations contribute to environmental degradation, water
consumption, and e-waste. Research by leading AI sustainability expert
Sasha Luccioni estimates that AI-generated text responses, such as those
from Google AI Overview or ChatGPT, consume 30 times more energy to
generate new text versus extracting text from a source. As AI continues to
evolve, it is crucial to evaluate its environmental costs and explore ways to

mitigate its impact. Instructors may encourage students to be mindful of
the environmental impact of AI as they explore its applications and reflect
on the balance between convenience and sustainability.

Learning Activities

Conversation Starters A Few Questions to Get the
Discussion Going

In what ways do you think AI technologies impact the environment,
both positively and negatively?
Who should be responsible for making AI environmentally
sustainable? Why?
Can AI be made more eco-friendly? How?
Have you seen/heard about examples of AI being used to help the
environment?

Active Learning with AI Fun Ways to Explore AI’s
Strengths and Limitations

In teams, students can use the ChatUI Energy Bot to investigate the
energy consumption of everyday tasks when using AI. Students
find one example of AI energy use and compare it to something
familiar, like charging a phone.
Students could track their carbon footprint in a log for a week

related to AI.
No AI Alternatives:
Students investigate how much water is used to cool AI data
centers and compare it to daily household water use.
Students research the di"erence in energy consumption per
query between ChatGPT and Google and analyze the
di"erences.

Disciplinary Extensions Ideas for Exploring AI’s Impact in
Specific Fields

Business/Markets & Management: What is the responsibility of
tech companies in reducing AI’s environmental impact? Some
companies have been pulling back on sustainability goals.
Investigate what companies have done and how it compares to
what they’re currently doing.
Environmental Science: AI’s applications in climate modeling and
conservation e"orts versus its unintended consequences on
natural resources.
Arts & Media Studies: AI-generated images/media carry a
particularly large carbon footprint. What are the ethics and
implications of AI’s enviro impact in visual/media arts?
Public Policy: How awareness of AI’s environmental impacts can
inform regulation, energy standards, and national sustainability
goals in the tech sector.

Resources
Logan, C. Against AI and Its Environmental Harms-keep | Riseup Pad. Excellent megathread/aggregator of

all kinds of AI and the enviro sources. Organized by source types. [Aggregated bibliography]
Luccioni, S., Trevelin, B. & M. Mitchell. (2024, September 24). The Environmental Impacts of AI — Primer.
[Article]. Excellent starting place. Luccioni and her team are leading scholars in AI and the environment.

Cartography of generative AI. [Website]

Scholarly
Vincent, J. (2024, February 16). How much electricity do AI generators consume? The Verge. [Article]
Parshall, A. (2025, June 11). What Do Google’s AI Answers Cost the Environment? Scientific American.
[Magazine article]
Verma, P., & Tan, S. (2024, September 18). A bottle of water per email: The hidden environmental costs
of using AI chatbots. Washington Post. [News article]
Kwong, E. (2025, March 30). AI and the Environment NPR. Duration: 12 min. [Podcast].
Dope Labs. (2025, May 11). AI’s environmental cost. Duration: 38 minutes. [Podcast].
Roose, K., Newton, C., et al. (2025, January 17). Goodbye TikTok, Ni Hao RedNote? + A.I.’s Environmental
Impact + Meta’s Masculine Energy. The New York Times. [Podcast]

Recommendations
Related topics → Do we need AI? Who builds our AI?
AI Pedagogy Project (Harvard) Assignments → Filter by theme (e.g. misinformation) and/or subject (e.g.
science & technology studies)
Sustainability-related Articles from the AI Ethics & Policy News Aggregator sourced by Casey Fiesler.
Note: This would be an excellent place to identify recent news stories you could share with students, or
incorporate into a case study.

1. Hao, K. (2025). Empire of AI: Dreams and Nightmares in Sam Altman’s OpenAI. Penguin Press. Pg. 276
2. Luccioni, S., Jernite, Y., & Strubell, E. (2024). Power Hungry Processing: Watts Driving the Cost of AI
Deployment? The 2024 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, 85–99.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3630106.3658542

PHYSICAL LOCATION
The Erwin Square Mill Building
2024 West Main Street

BROWSE
What We Do
About

Durham, NC 27705

MAILING ADDRESS
Box 90700

Blog
Contact Us
Events

Durham, NC 27708

Directions

CONTACT US

Resources

Phone: (919) 660-5806
Email:

Newsletter Signup

learninginnovation@duke.edu

CONNECT
WITH US
SUPPORT OUR
WORK
Donate to Duke
Learning Innovation &
Lifetime Education

Copyright © 2025 Duke Learning Innovation & Lifetime Education

