WHAT WE DO ▽

Home

AI Ethics Learning Toolkit

BLOG

SEARCH

CONTACT US

EVENTS

RESOURCES

SUBSCRIBE

ABOUT US ▽

Does AI Harm Critical Thinking

AI ETHICS LEARNING TOOLKIT

Does AI Harm Critical
Thinking?
Exploring Critical Thinking and Overreliance

“[AI] could completely reorient our relationship to knowledge, prioritizing rapid,
detailed, abridged answers over a deep understanding and the consideration of
varied sources and viewpoints.”
– Matteo Wong, technology journalist at The Atlantic

Artificial intelligence is increasingly integrated into critical thinking and
decision-making across research, government, and industry. While AI
enables rapid data analysis at an unprecedented speed and scale,
overreliance on AI can erode an individual’ s critical thinking skills. In the
higher education context, researchers have found that university students
who use Large Language Models (LLMs) to complete writing and research
tasks experienced reduced cognitive load but demonstrated poorer
reasoning and argumentation skills compared to those students using

traditional search methods. Another research study found that students
using LLMs focused on a narrower set of ideas, resulting in more biased
and superficial analyses. Critical thinking–characterized by evaluation of
information, questioning of assumptions, and formation of independent
judgments–remains a uniquely human skill that AI cannot fully replicate.
Instead of serving as a replacement for human reasoning, AI should
function as a tool to enhance it. Students need to be aware of AI’s
limitations, biases, and errors, ensuring they do not outsource their
judgment to AI-generated content uncritically.

Learning Activities

Conversation Starters A Few Questions to Get the
Discussion Going

What does ‘critical thinking’ mean to you? Do you think AI will
become capable of ‘critical thinking,’ or is it something uniquely
human?
In what ways could overreliance on AI harm our critical thinking
skills in school or at work? Reflect on your own experiences with AI
when considering the question.
What strategies could students use to balance the benefits of AI
with the need to develop their own critical thinking skills?
How do you evaluate the accuracy of AI-generated information?
What strategies do you use to factcheck?

Active Learning with AI Fun Ways to Explore AI’s
Strengths and Limitations

Students compare AI-generated summaries or arguments with
ones they (or a peer) create and discuss di"erences in depth,
nuance, and accuracy. Reflect on your own writing process. How
does your writing and thinking process compare to what AI is
doing?
Students use AI to generate answers to complex questions, then
cross-check with scholarly sources, identifying inconsistencies or
biases. What did you discover? What was your process for checking
the chatbot’s response?
Have students prompt AI to generate arguments for and against a
controversial topic, then evaluate the reasoning and missing
nuances. How might your own biases, or views, impact your
evaluation?
No AI Alternative: Provide students with two versions of an
argument (one AI-generated, one human-generated) without
revealing the source. Discuss which one they found more
convincing and why.

Disciplinary Extensions Ideas for Exploring AI’s Impact in
Specific Fields

Writing: Engage with a chatbot as a writing partner for an
assignment. Reflect on the process: what role did you play in
guiding the chatbot? How did the chatbot’s suggestions influence
your writing? How di"erent would it be to engage with a
student/peer reviewer, as compared to a chatbot?
Philosophy & Ethics: Explore whether reliance on AI undermines

autonomy and personal responsibility in decision-making
Media & Journalism: Examine how AI-generated misinformation
influences public opinion
Psychology & Neuroscience: Explore how the brain regions
associated with trust and decision-making respond to AI-generated
information and study whether AI can assist in reducing cognitive
overload or, paradoxically, increase individuals’ dependency and
make them less capable of handling complex decisions without AI
intervention. Relevant readings: Kosmyna et al. and Stadler et al.

Resources
Kim, L. (2025, January 13). I over relied on AI and those shortcuts cost me | HackerNoon. [Blog article]

Wong, M. (2024, November 8). AI is killing the internet’s curiosity. The Atlantic. [Magazine article]
Hedrih, V. (2024, September 17). Study finds ChatGPT eases students’ cognitive load, but at the expense
of critical thinking. Psychology News. [News article]

Scholarly
Kosmyna, N., Hauptmann, E., Yuan, Y. T., Situ, J., Liao, X.-H., Beresnitzky, A. V., Braunstein, I., & Maes, P.
(2025, June 10). Your brain on ChatGPT: Accumulation of cognitive debt when using an AI assistant for
essay writing task. arXiv. [Preprint]
Stadler, M., Bannert, M., & Sailer, M. (2024). Cognitive ease at a cost: LLMs reduce mental e"ort but
compromise depth in student scientific inquiry. Computers in Human Behavior, 160, 108386. [Journal
article]
Lee, H.-P. et al. (2025, April 1). The impact of generative AI on critical thinking: Self-reported reductions in
cognitive e!ort and confidence e!ects from a survey of knowledge workers. Proceedings of the ACM CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. [Report]
Zhou, E., & Lee, D. (2024). Generative artificial intelligence, human creativity, and art. PNAS Nexus, 3(3),
pg 052. [Article]
Zirar, A. (2023). Exploring the impact of language models, such as ChatGPT, on student learning and
assessment.Review of Education, 11(3), e3433. [Journal article]

Recommendations
Related topics → Can we trust AI? Does AI spread mis/disinfo?
AI Pedagogy Project (Harvard) Assignments → Filter by theme (e.g. misinformation) and/or subject (e.g.
ethics & philosophy)

1. Wong, M. (2024, November 8). AI Is Killing the Internet’s Curiosity. The Atlantic.
2. Stadler, M., Bannert, M., & Sailer, M. (2024). Cognitive ease at a cost: LLMs reduce mental e"ort but
compromise depth in student scientific inquiry. Computers in Human Behavior, 160, 108386.
3. Kosmyna, N., Hauptmann, E., Yuan, Y. T., Situ, J., Liao, X.-H., Beresnitzky, A. V., Braunstein, I., & Maes, P.
(2025, June 10). Your Brain on ChatGPT: Accumulation of Cognitive Debt when Using an AI Assistant for Essay
Writing Task. arXiv.Org. https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.08872v1

PHYSICAL LOCATION
The Erwin Square Mill Building
2024 West Main Street

BROWSE
What We Do
About

Durham, NC 27705

MAILING ADDRESS
Box 90700

Blog
Contact Us
Events

Durham, NC 27708

Directions

CONTACT US

Resources

Phone: (919) 660-5806
Email:

Newsletter Signup

learninginnovation@duke.edu

CONNECT
WITH US
SUPPORT OUR
WORK
Donate to Duke
Learning Innovation &
Lifetime Education

Copyright © 2025 Duke Learning Innovation & Lifetime Education

