WHAT WE DO ▽

Home

AI Ethics Learning Toolkit

BLOG

SEARCH

CONTACT US

EVENTS

RESOURCES

SUBSCRIBE

ABOUT US ▽

Who Benefits From AI?

AI ETHICS LEARNING TOOLKIT

Who Benefits From AI?
Exploring the AI Divide and AI Info Privilege

“We have a computing divide at the heart of the A.I. revolution…It’s not merely a
hardware problem. It’s the sovereignty of our digital future.”
– Lacina Koné, the director general of Smart Africa

An extension of the digital divide, the AI divide refers to the growing gap
between individuals, communities, and companies who have access to
cutting-edge Artificial Intelligence tools and those who do not. Roughly
one-third of the global population (2.6 billion people) does not have
regular access to the internet (which would include AI). Beyond physical
access to technology – like hardware, software, or premium AI
subscriptions – this divide also includes disparities in access to education
and skills training that are critical for using AI e!ectively. AI’s rapid
integration into the workplace disproportionately a!ects people in lowwage or routine jobs, who are more likely to face displacement from the
jobs of the future. At the industry level, development and control of

advanced AI is concentrated in the hands of multi-billion dollar, “Big Tech”
corporations – such as Meta, OpenAI, Amazon, X, Google, and Microsoft.
Although smaller start-ups are entering the AI space, they must overcome
huge barriers, including the high cost of training LLMs and limited access
to high-quality datasets. In learning about AI, students should reflect on
their own AI privileges, as well as global AI divides, and consider what
e!orts could be e!ective in bridging the AI divide.

Learning Activities

Conversation Starters A Few Questions to Get the
Discussion Going

Who is harmed, and who benefits, from access to AI technology?
Are there AI tools that you pay for premium subscriptions to (ex.
Premium ChatGPT, Grammarly)? If so, how does that benefit you?
If not, what disadvantages might you face?
What are some types of jobs you could see being replaced by AI?
What are some ways we can ensure equitable access to AI and AI
training?

Active Learning with AI Fun Ways to Explore AI’s
Strengths and Limitations

Freemium AI vs. Premium AI. Students can investigate the

di!erence between access to a freemium version of ChatGPT vs.
Duke’s premium subscription.
Educational / Information Privilege backpack. Ask students to work
alone to brainstorm the educational/info privileges they’ve
observed in K-12 and college settings. Ask them to include at least
a couple “AI” privileges. (Examples and blank backpack activity).
Role play. Assign roles to groups of students (community college
vs. R1 University; private K-12 school vs. underfunded public
school; small business vs. large corporation). Students research
and brainstorm some of the advantages/disadvantages their
assigned organization faces in the age of AI.

Disciplinary Extensions Ideas for Exploring AI’s Impact in
Specific Fields
Public Policy/Education: Students could research and present on
a proposed intervention or policy for improving the AI divide in a
particular context (K-12, higher ed).
Economics: Students can “follow the money” and research top
tech companies, funders, partnerships, and data sources.
Compare/contrast availability of $ and resources between big tech
companies and smaller start-ups.
Computer Science: Students could discuss the factors that benefit
students studying CS at a university like Duke, in contrast to a
community college, or less-resourced institution?

Resources
Satariano, A., Mozur, P., Russell, K., & Kim, J. (2025, June 23). The A.I. Race Is Splitting the World Into
Haves and Have-Nots. The New York Times. [News article]

Trucano, M. (2023). AI and the next digital divide in education. Brookings. [Blog post]
Gay, R. (2012, May 16). Peculiar benefits. The Rumpus. [Blog post]
Booth, char. (2014, December 1). On Information Privilege. Info-Mational. [Blog post]

Scholarly
Kak, A., West, S., & Whittaker, M. (2023). Make no mistake—AI is owned by Big Tech. MIT Technology
Review. [Article]
Gonzales, S. (2024, August 6). AI literacy and the new Digital Divide—A Global Call for Action. UNESCO.
[Report]

Recommendations
Related topics → Is AI biased?
AI Pedagogy Project (Harvard) Assignments → Filter by theme (e.g. bias) and/or subject (e.g. ethics &
philosophy)

1. Satariano, A., Mozur, P., Russell, K., & Kim, J. (2025, June 23). The A.I. Race Is Splitting the World Into
Haves and Have-Nots. The New York Times.
2. International Telecommunication Union (ITU). (2023, September 12). Population of global o!ine
continues steady decline to 2.6 billion people in 2023 [UN]. ITU.Int.

PHYSICAL LOCATION
The Erwin Square Mill Building
2024 West Main Street

BROWSE
What We Do
About

Durham, NC 27705

MAILING ADDRESS
Box 90700

Blog
Contact Us
Events

Durham, NC 27708

Directions

CONTACT US

Resources

Phone: (919) 660-5806
Email:

Newsletter Signup

learninginnovation@duke.edu

CONNECT
WITH US
SUPPORT OUR
WORK
Donate to Duke
Learning Innovation &
Lifetime Education

Copyright © 2025 Duke Learning Innovation & Lifetime Education

