WHAT WE DO ▽

Home

AI Ethics Learning Toolkit

BLOG

SEARCH

CONTACT US

EVENTS

RESOURCES

SUBSCRIBE

ABOUT US ▽

Does AI Spread Mis-disinfo

AI ETHICS LEARNING TOOLKIT

Does AI Spread Mis/Disinfo?
Exploring Deep Fakes and Mis/Disinformation

“The popular emergence of generative AI has deepened uncertainty in an alreadyskeptical information environment, leading people to suspect that anything could be
the product of synthetic media.”
– Charlie Warzel, technology journalist at The Atlantic

From Taylor Swift deepfakes to synthetic AI robocalls from politicians, AI
tools have the potential to turn any message into a viral disinformation
campaign. Disinformation refers to “false, inaccurate, or misleading
information designed, presented and promoted to intentionally cause
public harm or for profit.” Misinformation is similar in nature, but the
sharers of misinformation may have done so accidentally and without
intent to harm. AI models aren’t human – they don’t possess intent to
harm, whether deliberately or inadvertently. So, what’s the concern? Some
argue that the ready availability and low cost of AI tools could facilitate the
spread of higher quality mis/disinformation by bad (human) actors. Others

argue the danger of this is overblown and there is insu!cient evidencebased research to support the hype. It may be some time before we fully
understand the impact of AI-generated mis/disinformation, students
should be aware of the potential ways in which AI could be used to
manipulate text, images, video, and information sources. They should
remain critical consumers and sharers of information they come across.

Learning Activities

Conversation Starters A Few Questions to Get the
Discussion Going

Have you ever come across a deepfake, or mis/disinformation
online? How could you tell?
What are some scenarios you can imagine where
mis/disinformation could cause real-world harm?
Who do you think is most susceptible to being manipulated by
mis/disinformation? Why do you think they are more vulnerable to
being swayed by it?

Active Learning with AI Fun Ways to Explore AI’s
Strengths and Limitations

Students can create fake content with AI for a faux disinformation
campaign. Share the prompt, AI outputs, and have the class react.

Students can discuss a case study from the Disinformation Studies
syllabus. Case Studies include: Japanese incarceration, media and
the AIDs crisis, the myth of the “Welfare Queen”, and more.
Instructor can choose some examples from #deepfake-tagged
articles in Snopes.com for students to discuss. Ask students to
reflect on the ways the Snopes authors fact-checked the claim.

Disciplinary Extensions Ideas for Exploring AI’s Impact in
Specific Fields
Psychology: Research has found that when disinformation is more
targeted and personalized, it is more persuasive. What are some of
the psychological (phenomena) at play in the creation and
consumption of disinformation?
History: Students could look at the historical roots of
disinformation and make connections to modern day AI
narratives.
Arts & Humanities: What is the role of visual/media arts in
disinformation/propaganda campaigns?
Computer Science/Engineering: What are some of the most
promising detection technologies that could help identify fake
content?

Resources
Elliott, V. (2024, Sept. 2nd). AI-Fakes Detection Is Failing Voters in the Global South. Wired. [Magazine
article]
Mehrotra, D. (2024, June 19th). Perplexity Is a Bullshit Machine. Wired. [Magazine article]
Hsu, T., & Thompson, S. A. (2024, July 11). Even Disinformation Experts Don’t Know How to Stop It. The
New York Times.

UNC CITAP. (2021). Does Not Compute. This podcast predates the GAI explosion but includes
numerous, excellent episodes on disinformation. [Podcast]

Scholarly
Kuo, R., & Marwick, A. (2021). Critical disinformation studies: History, power, and politics. Harvard
Kennedy School Misinformation Review. [Article]
Sison, A. J. G., Daza, M. T., Gozalo-Brizuela, R., & Garrido-Merchán, E. C. (2023). ChatGPT: More than a
Weapon of Mass Deception, Ethical challenges and responses from the Human-Centered Artificial
Intelligence (HCAI) perspective. arXiv. [Preprint]
Simon, F. M., Altay, S., & Mercier, H. (2023). Misinformation reloaded? Fears about the impact of
generative AI on misinformation are overblown. Harvard Kennedy School Misinformation Review. [Article]

Matz, S. C., et al. (2024). The potential of generative AI for personalized persuasion at scale. Scientific
Reports, 14(1), 4692. [Article]

Recommendations
Related topics → Does AI harm critical thinking? Is AI biased?
UNC’s Critical Disinformation Studies: a Syllabus project
AI Pedagogy Project (Harvard) Assignments → Filter by theme (e.g. misinformation) and/or subject (e.g.
journalism)
Mis/disinformation-related Articles from the AI Ethics & Policy News Aggregator sourced by Casey
Fiesler. Note: This would be an excellent place to identify recent news stories you could share with
students, or incorporate into a case study.

1. Directorate-General for Communications Networks, Content and Technology (European Commission).
(2018). A multi-dimensional approach to disinformation: Report of the independent High level Group on fake
news and online disinformation. Publications O!ce of the European Union.
https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2759/739290
2. Matz, S. C., Teeny, J. D., Vaid, S. S., Peters, H., Harari, G. M., & Cerf, M. (2024). The potential of generative
AI for personalized persuasion at scale. Scientific Reports, 14(1), 4692. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598024-537553. Simon, F. M., Altay, S., & Mercier, H. (2023). Misinformation reloaded? Fears about the impact of
generative AI on misinformation are overblown. Harvard Kennedy School Misinformation Review.
https://doi.org/10.37016/mr-2020-127

PHYSICAL LOCATION
The Erwin Square Mill Building
2024 West Main Street

BROWSE
What We Do
About

Durham, NC 27705

MAILING ADDRESS
Box 90700

Blog
Contact Us
Events

Durham, NC 27708

Directions

CONTACT US

Resources

Phone: (919) 660-5806
Email:

Newsletter Signup

learninginnovation@duke.edu

CONNECT
WITH US
SUPPORT OUR
WORK
Donate to Duke
Learning Innovation &
Lifetime Education

Copyright © 2025 Duke Learning Innovation & Lifetime Education

