WHAT WE DO ▽

Home

AI Ethics Learning Toolkit

BLOG

SEARCH

CONTACT US

EVENTS

RESOURCES

SUBSCRIBE

ABOUT US ▽

Who Builds Our AI?

AI ETHICS LEARNING TOOLKIT

Who Builds Our AI?
Exploring Ghost Work and AI Labor

“What can end up happening is that certain populations become the guinea pigs of
these technologies, or conversely, they become the cheap labor to power these
technologies.”
– Dr. Seeta Peña Gangadharan, media scholar

Sam Altman, Mark Zuckerberg, Sundar Pichai, Elon Musk, Je! Bezos –
you’ve likely heard of the Big Tech founders behind some of the most
prominent AI companies. But who actually builds the technology powering
AI tools? For starters, a large workforce of computer programmers, data
scientists, and software developers design the algorithms, neural
networks, and machine learning models that provide the backbone of AI
tools. These workers have backgrounds in computer or data science,
statistics, and engineering. But behind the scenes, another more hidden
or “ghost” workforce performs the often unsavory tasks that make AI
actually function – tasks like content moderation, data annotation, data

labeling, and model training. These workers, often outsourced by Big Tech
to Global South countries, endure low wages and exploitative conditions,
despite their critical role in shaping AI. As AI becomes integrated into daily
life, students should critically examine the ethical implications of the
hidden labor behind these technologies.

Learning Activities

Conversation Starters A Few Questions to Get the
Discussion Going

What do you know about how AI technology is built? Who are the
key players?
Do you think tech companies should be responsible for ensuring
safe working conditions for outsourced AI laborers? If so, how?
What parallels do you see between the AI workforce and other
types of work that rely on outsourced, low-wage workers (ex. gig
workers)?

Active Learning with AI Fun Ways to Explore AI’s
Strengths and Limitations

Students gain experience in data labeling by using an open source
tool to label a set of images and text.
No AI Alternative: Students examine AI company statements /

policies surrounding outsourced labor for a few major AI
companies and discuss. Ex. OpenAI, Google

Disciplinary Extensions Ideas for Exploring AI’s Impact in
Specific Fields

Economics: Students could research the network of where many
Big Tech companies outsource data annotation and content
moderation for AI (ex. Sama, Scale AI). Alternatively, students could
research other forms of “ghost economies” and compare/contrast
with AI ghost work (see: Ghost Work book).
Languages/Linguistics: Students could explore how the issue of
translation and transcription impact data labeling for AI – exploring
some of the linguistic biases that may exist.
Data Science/Global Health: Students consider a case study for
bias in data labeling of medical imaging datasets (ex. skin color
disparities in dermatology data).

Resources
Perrigo, B. (2023, January 18). “Exclusive: The $2 Per Hour Workers Who Made ChatGPT Safer.” TIME.
[Magazine article]
Bartholomew, J. (2025). Q&A: Uncovering the labor exploitation that powers AI. Columbia Journalism
Review. (follow-up interview to TIME piece). [Interview]
Mozilla. “The Humans in the Machine.” (2023). IRL Podcast. Hosted by Bridget Todd. 21 minutes.
[Podcast]

Scholarly

Nguyen, A., & Mateescu, A. (2024). Generative AI and Labor: Power, Hype, and Value at Work. “AI’s
dependence on human labor,” Part 2, pg. 11-16. Data & Society. [Report]
Williams, A., and Miceli, M. Data Work and its Layers of (In)visibility. Just Tech. Social Science Research
Council. September 6, 2023. [Article]
Gray, M. L., & Suri, S. (2019). Ghost work: How to stop Silicon Valley from building a new global underclass.
Houghton Mi#in Harcourt. [Book – available in Duke Libraries]
Hao, K. (2025). Empire of AI: Dreams and nightmares in Sam Altman’s OpenAI. Penguin Press. [Book –
available in Duke Libraries]

– Chapter 9 focuses on Labor & AI issues and is an excellent

introduction to the topic.

Recommendations
Related topics → Is AI biased? Who benefits from AI?
AI Pedagogy Project (Harvard) Assignments → Filter by theme (e.g. misinformation) and/or subject (e.g.
ethics & philosophy)
Labor-related Articles from the AI Ethics & Policy News Aggregator sourced by Casey Fiesler. Note: This
would be an excellent place to identify recent news stories you could share with students, or
incorporate into a case study.

1. Interview in Rolling Stone, O’Neil, L. (2023, August 12). These Women Tried to Warn Us About AI. Rolling
Stone.

PHYSICAL LOCATION
The Erwin Square Mill Building
2024 West Main Street

BROWSE
What We Do
About

Durham, NC 27705

MAILING ADDRESS
Box 90700

Blog
Contact Us
Events

Durham, NC 27708

Directions

CONTACT US

Resources

Phone: (919) 660-5806
Email:

Newsletter Signup

learninginnovation@duke.edu

CONNECT
WITH US
SUPPORT OUR
WORK
Donate to Duke
Learning Innovation &
Lifetime Education

Copyright © 2025 Duke Learning Innovation & Lifetime Education

