WHAT WE DO ▽

Home

AI Ethics Learning Toolkit

BLOG

SEARCH

CONTACT US

EVENTS

RESOURCES

SUBSCRIBE

ABOUT US ▽

Glossary

AI ETHICS LEARNING TOOLKIT

Glossary

We generated these definitions by uploading the content of our AI Ethics Learning Toolkit
into Google’s NotebookLM and then creating a glossary.

AI Divide / Digital Divide
The growing gap between individuals, communities, and companies who have access to,
use of, and skills related to cutting-edge Artificial Intelligence technologies.

AI Hallucination
An instance where an AI model generates misleading, inaccurate, or entirely fabricated
content, often without a clear basis in its training data. Many favor alternative terms
(bullshit, machine errors, AI mirage), so as not to assign human qualities to AI technology.

AI Hype / AI Boosterism

An outsized enthusiasm for the benefits of Artificial Intelligence by individuals,
organizations, and/or the media, with little acknowledgement of the harms these
technologies may cause.

AI Literacy
The ability to understand how Artificial Intelligence (AI) works, recognize its strengths and
limitations, critically evaluate AI tools and outputs, and thoughtfully consider the ethical,
social, and practical implications of its use.

AI Privilege / Information Privilege
Related to the AI Divide, AI privilege refers to the benefits of one’s access to, use of, and
skills related to cutting-edge Artificial Intelligence technologies.

AI Slop
The flood of low-quality, sometimes misleading, AI-generated content (text, images, video)
present on the internet, social media, and other information/publication platforms.

Bias (data)
Bias that is present in the training and fine-tuning data of AI models. Bias negatively a"ects
the models functions and outputs.

Content Moderation
The process (human, or automated) of reviewing and filtering online content to remove
material that violates platform guidelines or is deemed inappropriate or harmful.

Copyright Infringement
The reproduction, distribution, performance, or derivative of a copyrighted work without
the permission of the copyright owner.

Critical Thinking
The analysis and evaluation of an issue in order to form a judgment. In the context of AI, it
involves the skills of evaluating AI-generated information and questioning its assumptions.

Data Labeling / Data Annotation
The process of annotating raw data with meaningful tags or labels to provide context and
structure for machine learning models.

Deepfakes
Synthetic media (images, audio, or video) that have been altered or created using AI to
convincingly depict someone saying or doing something they did not actually say or do.
These may be somewhat benign celebrity deepfakes (Taylor swift peddling Le Creuset
cookware), or dangerously misleading (ex. Zelensky deepfakes).

Fair Use
A legal doctrine that permits limited use of copyrighted material without permission from
the copyright holder for purposes such as criticism, news reporting, teaching, scholarship,
or research.

Garbage in, Garbage out (GIGO)
The phenomenon where flawed, biased, or low-quality data or input leads to outputs that
are similarly flawed, biased, or of poor quality.

Ghost Work / Ghost Labor
The often invisible human workers who make AI systems function by working on tasks like
data labeling, content moderation, and transcription.

Mis/Disinformation
(Dis)information – False or inaccurate information that is deliberately created and spread
with the intent to deceive or cause harm. (Mis)information has the same e"ects but is not
intentional.

Model Training
The process of using data to teach a machine learning model to identify patterns and make
predictions or decisions.

Monoculture
In the context of AI training data, it refers to the overrepresentation of certain viewpoints,
languages, or perspectives (often from the Global North and dominant cultures) leading to
a lack of diversity in the AI’s understanding and outputs.

Overreliance
Excessive dependence on AI tools or outputs, potentially leading to a decline in human
skills like critical thinking and independent decision making.

Privacy
The right of individuals to control the collection, use, and dissemination of their personal
information. In AI, it relates to how the user data and information used for training models
are handled.

Trust
Confidence in the reliability, truth or ability of something. The rapid spread of AI-generated
content, particularly hallucinations and AI slop, muddies the waters of what is reliable
information online.

PHYSICAL LOCATION
The Erwin Square Mill Building
2024 West Main Street

BROWSE
What We Do
About

Durham, NC 27705

MAILING ADDRESS
Box 90700

Blog
Contact Us
Events

Durham, NC 27708

Directions

CONTACT US

Resources

Phone: (919) 660-5806
Email:

Newsletter Signup

learninginnovation@duke.edu

CONNECT
WITH US
SUPPORT OUR
WORK
Donate to Duke
Learning Innovation &
Lifetime Education

Copyright © 2025 Duke Learning Innovation & Lifetime Education

