WHAT WE DO ▽

Home

AI Ethics Learning Toolkit

BLOG

SEARCH

CONTACT US

EVENTS

RESOURCES

SUBSCRIBE

ABOUT US ▽

Is AI Theft?

AI ETHICS LEARNING TOOLKIT

Is AI Theft?
Exploring Copyright and Intellectual Property?

“This harvesting of our work, scraping and impersonating our styles, it’s the same as
a parasite that sucks the light out of its host without invitation.”
– Tim Flach, wildlife photographer, one of the most “scraped” artists in the world

To many users, AI seems like magic. It can generate images, write papers,
and summarize complex topics into tidy bullet points. But what sources
are under AI’s hood? How does it know so much? AI models are trained on
vast amounts of human-generated content from the internet – including
everything from transcribed YouTube videos and Reddit threads to image
libraries and the entire text of Wikipedia. This raises a critical legal and
ethical question: Are AI companies committing copyright infringement
by scraping and using this content without permission? The New York
Times, numerous authors, artists, and musicians think so. They’ve filed
lawsuits against companies like OpenAI and Meta, arguing that their work
fuels these models – yet they receive no credit, attribution, or

compensation. AI companies defend their practices by citing the Fair Use
doctrine, claiming that AI outputs are “transformative” – computational
mashups that are fundamentally di!erent from the original works. But
many legal questions remain unresolved, and frustration is building across
the many creative industries that are impacted. As students increasingly
turn to AI, it’s important for them to consider not just what the tools can
do, but the human contributions and intellectual property that made
them possible. Understanding the legal and ethical issues is key to
becoming a responsible and informed user.

Learning Activities

Conversation Starters A Few Questions to Get the
Discussion Going

Have you heard/read any stories about artists, musicians, authors
speaking out about their work being impacted by AI? If so, are you
sympathetic?
How do you see the long-term impacts of generative AI on creative
industries (e.g., writing, art, music, movies/TV)?
Do you think artists, musicians, writers should be credited and/or
compensated by AI companies who have trained on their work?
What would a fair system look like?
Is it legal to upload copyrighted content to AI to get summaries for
personal use? How aware are you of copyright restrictions with AI
tools that you use? Who might be harmed by copyright violations
with AI?
What responsibilities should students or researchers have when
giving credit to AI-generated content they relied on in their own
work?

Active Learning with AI Fun Ways to Explore AI’s
Strengths and Limitations

Prompt ChatGPT for the full text of something you know to be
copyrighted (Ex. a chapter from your Chem 101 textbook). How
does it respond?
Prompt ChatGPT to mimic lyrics “in the style of” your favorite artist,
musician, or writer (Ex. In the style of Taylor Swift, write me a song
about getting ghosted by a friend). What do you think about the
output? Could you see ‘mimicry’ as potentially harmful?
Try a music generator (ex. Suno) and create a song. What was your
prompt? What do you think about the output? Could you see this
as potentially harmful?

Disciplinary Extensions Ideas for Exploring AI’s Impact in
Specific Fields

Journalism/Public Policy: How does AI harm journalism? Use a
Case Study, like the New York Times lawsuit, to have students
debate the legal arguments
Art/Visual Studies/Film Discuss the impact of AI on the art and
film industry. Case study on the OpenAI Studio Ghibli AI
(background article).
I&E/Engineering: Engineering, or I&E, students can explore the
intellectual property issues behind engineering design involving AI.
E.g. If an AI tool is used to design a product, who should own the
result? The user, the developer, or the company behind the AI?

Literature: The question of whether and how digital humanists
can conduct quantitative works has been a discussion for a long
time. Some publishers (like JSTOR and Wiley) already license their
copyrighted materials for scholars to conduct “distant reading.” Is
this use case di!erent from licensing AI models to train on
copyrighted materials? Why or why not?

Resources
Menand, L. (2024, January 15). Is A.I. the Death of I.P.? The New Yorker. [Magazine article]
Knibbs, K. (2023, Nov. 6). Johnny Cash’s Taylor Swift Cover Predicts the Boring Future of AI Music. Wired.
[Magazine article]
Sellman, M. (2025, February 7). Photographer says AI being used to copy his work. The Times. [News
article]
Barbaro, M., et al. (2024, April 16). A.I.’s Original Sin. The New York Times. [Podcast]

Scholarly
Goetze, T. S. (2024). AI Art is Theft: Labour, Extraction, and Exploitation, Or, On the Dangers of
Stochastic Pollocks. The 2024 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, 186–196.
[Conference paper]
Congressional Research Services (CRS) Report. (2023, September). Generative Artificial Intelligence and
Copyright Law. [Government report]
Reed, R. (March 22, 2024). Does ChatGPT violate New York Times’ copyrights? Harvard Law School.
[Interview]

Recommendations
Related topics → Who builds our AI?
AI Pedagogy Project (Harvard) Assignments → Filter by theme (e.g. misinformation) and/or subject (e.g.
ethics & philosophy)
Copyright & IP-related Articles from the AI Ethics & Policy News Aggregator sourced by Casey Fiesler.
Note: This would be an excellent place to identify recent news stories you could share with students, or

incorporate into a case study.

1. Sellman, M. (2025, February 7). Photographer says AI being used to copy his work. The Times.

PHYSICAL LOCATION
The Erwin Square Mill Building
2024 West Main Street
Durham, NC 27705

MAILING ADDRESS
Box 90700
Durham, NC 27708

CONTACT US
Phone: (919) 660-5806
Email:
learninginnovation@duke.edu

CONNECT
WITH US
SUPPORT OUR
WORK
Donate to Duke
Learning Innovation &
Lifetime Education

BROWSE
What We Do
About
Blog
Contact Us
Events
Directions
Resources
Newsletter Signup

Copyright © 2025 Duke Learning Innovation & Lifetime Education

