WHAT WE DO ▽

Home

AI Ethics Learning Toolkit

BLOG

SEARCH

CONTACT US

EVENTS

RESOURCES

SUBSCRIBE

ABOUT US ▽

Instructors Guide

AI ETHICS LEARNING TOOLKIT

Instructors Guide
This section provides an overview of the topic as it relates to Artificial
Intelligence, including definitions of key concepts where relevant. It o!ers
instructors background and context to better understand the topic scope,
suggested activities, and recommended resources.

Learning Activities

Conversation Starters A Few Questions to Get the
Discussion Going

These questions are designed to be lightweight and student-oriented,
prompting students to reflect on personal experiences without requiring
background knowledge. They can be used in a variety of formats, such as a
quick 5-minute class discussion, a think-pair-share activity, a Canvas
discussion, a reflective essay prompt, or even a more in-depth class
debate.

Active Learning with AI Fun Ways to Explore AI’s
Strengths and Limitations

These activities provide hands-on experience with AI, allowing students to
engage more directly with it. Instructors should consider the accessibility
and ease-of-use of available tools for their students. Microsoft Co-pilot and
ChatGPT EDU are freely available through Duke OIT, and free versions of
certain GenAI tools like ChatGPT and Google’s Gemini may be options most
familiar to students. Consider o!ering a “No AI Alternative,” as some
students may have legitimate ethical concerns about using AI.

Disciplinary Extensions Ideas for Exploring AI’s Impact in
Specific Fields

These suggestions aim to help instructors integrate AI topics into upperlevel, discipline-specific courses. By incorporating discipline-specific
readings or applications, instructors can deepen students’ exploration of AI
within that field of study. While not exhaustive of all departments at Duke,
these activities o!er ideas for use in social sciences, natural sciences, and
arts and humanities courses.

Resources
This curated selection of readings includes both popular and scholarly sources, o!ering a diverse range of
perspectives on the topic. We have incorporated various format genres – such as videos, podcasts, and both
journalistic and research-oriented articles – since AI and technology topics are widely covered across media. We
aim to provide resources that would be openly accessible to students. While not a comprehensive bibliography,
this list could serve as a resource for students’ course readings or as a starting point for instructors to explore
the subject further on their own.

Resource Note for Duke Instructors:
New York Times Online access – All current Duke students, faculty, and sta! have free access to the
NYT Online through the Duke University Libraries.
Atlantic Online access – All current Duke students, faculty, and sta! have free access to The Atlantic
Online through the Duke University Libraries.
Wall Street Journal Online access – All current Duke students, faculty, and sta! have free access to
The Wall Street Journal Online through the Duke University Libraries.
Additional publications in the toolkit (popular, scholarly) may require access through the Duke University
Libraries website.

Recommendations
Related topics → Suggested topics
External recommendations → When possible, we provide additional resources beyond Duke that may
inspire and support teaching on the topic.

PHYSICAL LOCATION
The Erwin Square Mill Building
2024 West Main Street

BROWSE
What We Do
About

Durham, NC 27705

MAILING ADDRESS
Box 90700

Blog
Contact Us
Events

Durham, NC 27708

Directions

CONTACT US

Resources

Phone: (919) 660-5806
Email:

Newsletter Signup

learninginnovation@duke.edu

CONNECT
WITH US
SUPPORT OUR
WORK
Donate to Duke
Learning Innovation &
Lifetime Education

Copyright © 2025 Duke Learning Innovation & Lifetime Education

