Eighteen pitfalls to beware of in AI journalism
A checklist for avoiding hype
SAYASH KAPOOR AND ARVIND NARAYANAN
SEP 30, 2022

36

3

Reporting about AI is hard. Companies hype their products and most

journalists aren’t sufficiently familiar with the technology. When news arti

uncritically repeat PR statements, overuse images of robots, attribute agen

to AI tools, or downplay their limitations, they mislead and misinform read
about the potential and limitations of AI.

We noticed that many articles tend to mislead in similar ways, so we analy

over 50 articles about AI from major publications, from which we compiled

recurring pitfalls. We hope that being familiar with these will help you dete

hype whenever you see it. We also hope this compilation of pitfalls will hel
journalists avoid them.
We were inspired by many previous efforts at dismantling hype in news
reporting on AI by Prof. Emily Bender, Prof. Ben Shneiderman, Lakshmi

Sivadas and Sabrina Argoub, Prof. Emily Tucker, and Dr. Daniel Leufer et al
You can download a PDF checklist of the 18 pitfalls with examples here.
You’re reading AI Snake Oil, a blog about our
upcoming book. Subscribe to get new posts.
Type your email...

Subscribe

Example 1: “The Machine Are Learning, and s
are the students” (NYT)
We identi(ed 19 issues in this article, which you can read here.
In December 2019, NYT published a piece about educational technology

(EdTech) product called Bakpax. It is a 1,500-word, feature-length article th
provides neither accuracy, balance, nor context.
It is sourced almost entirely from company spokespeople, and the author

borrows liberally from Bakpax's PR materials to exaggerate the role of AI. T

keep the spotlight on AI, the article downplays the human labor from teach
that keeps the system running—such as developing and digitizing
assignments.
Bakpax shut down in May 2022.

This is hardly a surprise: EdTech is an overhyped space. In the last decade,

there have been hundreds of EdTech products that claim to "revolutionize"
education. Despite billions of dollars in funding, many of them fail.
Unfortunately, the article does not provide any context about this history.

A GIF of our annotations showing the prevalence of issues throughout the
article. Each annotation represents a pitfall. You can read the entire
annotated article here.

Example 2: “AI may be as effective as medica
specialists at diagnosing disease” (CNN)
We identi(ed 9 issues in this article, which you can read here.
In September 2019, CNN published this article about an AI research study.

buries the lede, seemingly intentionally: the spotlight is on the success of A

tools in diagnosis, whereas the study finds that fewer than 1% of papers on

tools follow robust reporting practices. In fact, an expert quoted at the end
the article stresses that this is the real message of the study.

Besides, the cover image of the article is a robot arm shaking hands with a

human, even though the study is about finding patterns in medical images

These humanoid images give a misleading view of AI, as we’ve described he

Example 3: “AI tested as university exams
undergo digital shift” (FT)
You can read the annotated article here.
Many schools and universities have adopted remote proctoring software
during the COVID-19 pandemic. These tools suffer from bias and lack of
validity, enable surveillance, and raise other concerns. There has been an
uproar against remote proctoring from students, non-profits, and even
senators.
In November 2021, the Financial Times published an article on a product

called Sciolink that presents an entirely one-sided view of remote proctori

It almost exclusively quotes the creators of Sciolink and provides no conte
about the limitations and risks of remote proctoring tools.

Eighteen pitfalls in AI journalism

We analyzed over 50 news stories on AI from 5 prominent publications: Th
New York Times, CNN, Financial Times, TechCrunch, and VentureBeat.

We briefly discuss the 18 pitfalls below; see our checklist for more details a
examples.

Flawed human-AI comparison

What? A false comparison between AI tools and humans that implies AI too
and humans are similar in how they learn and perform.

Why is this an issue? Rather than describing AI as a broad set of tools, suc
comparisons anthropomorphize AI tools and imply that they have the

potential to act as agents in the real world.
Pitfall 1. Attributing agency to AI: Describing AI systems as taking actions

independent of human supervision or implying that they may soon be able
do so.

Pitfall 2. Suggestive imagery: Images of humanoid robots are often used to

illustrate articles about AI, even if the article has nothing to do with robots

This gives readers a false impression that AI tools are embodied, even whe
is just software that learns patterns from data.

Pitfall 3. Comparison with human intelligence: In some cases, articles on A

imply that AI algorithms learn in the same way as humans do. For example
comparisons of deep learning algorithms with the way the human brain

functions are common. Such comparisons can lend credence to claims tha
is “sentient”, as Dr. Timnit Gebru and Dr. Margaret Mitchell note in their
recent op-ed.

Pitfall 4. Comparison with human skills: Similarly, articles often compare h

well AI tools perform with human skills on a given task. This falsely implies

that AI tools and humans compete on an equal footing—hiding the fact tha
tools only work in a narrow range of settings.

Hyperbolic, incorrect, or non-falsifiable claims about

What? Claims about AI tools that are speculative, sensational, or incorrect
spread hype about AI.
Why is this an issue? Such claims give a false sense of progress in AI and
make it difficult to identify where true advances are being made.
Pitfall 5. Hyperbole: Describing AI systems as revolutionary or

groundbreaking without concrete evidence of their performance gives a fa

impression of how useful they will be in a given setting. This issue is ampli

when AI tools are deployed in a setting where they are known to have past

failures—we should be skeptical about the effectiveness of AI tools in these
settings.

Pitfall 6. Uncritical comparison with historical transformations: Compari

AI tools with major historical transformations like the invention of electric

or the industrial revolution is a great marketing tactic. However, when new
articles adopt these terms, they can convey a false sense of potential and
progress—especially when these claims are not backed by real-world
evidence.

Pitfall 7. Unjustified claims about future progress: Claims about how futur

developments in AI tools will affect an industry, for instance, by implying t

AI tools will inevitably be useful in the industry. When these claims are ma
without evidence, they are mere speculation.
Pitfall 8. False claims about progress: In some cases, articles include false
claims about what an AI tool can do.

Pitfall 9. Incorrect claims about what a study reports: News articles often
cite academic studies to substantiate their claims. Unfortunately, there is

often a gap between the claims made based on an academic study and wha
the study reports.
Pitfall 10. Deep-sounding terms for banal actions: As Prof. Emily Bender

discusses in her work on dissecting AI hype, using phrases like “the elemen
act of next-word prediction” or “the magic of AI” implies that an AI tool is
doing something remarkable. It hides how mundane the tasks are.

Uncritically platforming those with self-interest
What? News articles often use PR statements and quotes from company

spokespeople to substantiate their claims without providing adequate con
or balance.
Why is this an issue? Emphasizing the opinions of self-interested parties

without providing alternative viewpoints can give an over-optimistic sense
progress.

Pitfall 11. Treating company spokespeople and researchers as neutral part
When an article only or primarily has quotes from company spokespeople

researchers who built an AI tool, it is likely to be over-optimistic about the
potential benefits of the tool.
Pitfall 12. Repeating or re-using PR terms and statements: News articles

often re-use terms from companies’ PR statements instead of describing h
an AI tool works. This can misrepresent the actual capabilities of a tool.

Limitations not addressed

What? The potential benefits of an AI tool are emphasized, but the potenti
limitations are not addressed or emphasized.

Why is this an issue? A one-sided analysis of AI tools can hide the potentia
limitations of these tools.
Pitfall 13. No discussion of potential limitations: Limitations such as

inadequate validation, bias, and potential for dual-use plague most AI tools

When these limitations are not discussed, readers can get a skewed view o
the risks associated with AI tools.

Pitfall 14. Limitations de-emphasized: Even if an article discusses limitatio

and quotes experts who can explain them, limitations are often downplaye
the structure of the article, for instance by positioning them at the end of
article or giving them limited space.
Pitfall 15. Limitations addressed in a “skeptics” framing: Limitations of AI

tools can be caveated in the framing of the article by positioning experts w

explain these limitations as skeptics who don’t see the true potential of AI.

Prof. Bender discusses this issue in much more detail in her response to an
NYT Mag article.

Pitfall 16. Downplaying human labor: When discussing AI tools, articles oft

foreground the role of technical advances and downplay all the human labo

that is necessary to build the system or keep it running. The book Ghost W

by Dr. Mary L. Gray and Dr. Siddharth Suri reveals how important this invis

labor is. Downplaying human labor misleads readers into thinking that AI t
work autonomously, instead of clarifying that they require significant
overhead in terms of human labor, as Prof. Sarah T. Roberts discusses.

Pitfall 17. Performance numbers reported without uncertainty estimation
caveats: There is seldom enough space in a news article to explain how

performance numbers like accuracy are calculated for a given application o

what they represent. Including numbers like “90% accuracy” in the body o
the article without specifying how these numbers are calculated can

misinform readers about the efficacy of an AI tool. Moreover, AI tools suffe

from performance degradations under even slight changes to the datasets

they are evaluated on. Therefore, absolute performance numbers can misle
readers about the efficacy of these tools in the real world.
Pitfall 18. The fallacy of inscrutability: Referring to AI tools as inscrutable

black boxes is a category error. Instead of holding the developers of these

tools accountable for their design choices, it shifts scrutiny to the technica

aspects of the system. Journalists should hold developers accountable for t

performance of AI tools rather than referring to these tools as black boxes
allowing developers to evade accountability.
While these 18 pitfalls appear in the articles we analyzed, there are other

issues that go beyond individual articles. For instance, when narratives of A
wiping out humanity are widely discussed, they overshadow current realworld problems such as bias and the lack of validity in AI tools. This

underscores that news media must play its agenda-setting role responsibl
We thank Klaudia Jaźwińska, Michael Lemonick, and Karen Rouse for their
feedback on a draft of this article. We re-used the code from Molly White et

al.’s The Edited Latecomers’ Guide to Crypto to generate our annotated articl

36 Likes

Previous

Discussion about this post
Comments

Restacks

Write a comment...

Leon Galindo Stenutz 30 Sep 2022

Excellent, informative, serious -- and a (temporary?) relief from the onslaught of information
dangers of runaway AI.
Two core questions:
1. Is AI truly a core species-level anthropogenic existential risk?

2. How much of what you have observed is merely the result of bad journalism and poorly m

public relations -- versus a partial or upfront attempt to hype up AI Risk as a form of fake new
even intentional PsyOps focused on destablizing certain audiences and societies?

Would also be interesting to better understand how your insights relate to the alarm concern

as an existential risk sounded by the likes of Stephen Hawking, Elon Musk, Eliezer Yudkowsk
Gates, Stuart Russell.

Also, to understand how your research and vision of the near to mid-term future of the impac

align with, or differ from the work of Nick Bostrom, Jaan Taallin, Max Tegmark, Yann LeCun, B
Christian, or Melanie Mitchell, among others.
Thanks, appreciate your article deeply.
LIKE (1)

REPLY

Abi Olvera 4 Aug 2024

Excellent and useful piece. The very last link for the “agenda setting quality” of media is brok
Were there other citations to replace it?

I can see the “black box” nature of AI being a cop out for applications like those in EdTech bu
“black box” discussion be useful in some limited circumstances like general purpose LLMs?
LIKE

REPLY

1 more comment...

© 2025 Sayash Kapoor and Arvind Narayanan ∙ Privacy ∙ Terms ∙ Collection notice
Substack is the home for great culture

